Day 9: Network Security and Firewalls

Firewalls:

Understand the purpose of firewalls in protecting networks from unauthorized access.
    Is a network security device that separates a trusted internal network from an external network.
    It regulates incoming and outgoing network traffic based on preset security rules.
Learn about iptables (or nftables, if your distribution uses it) for managing firewalls on Linux.
    In linux, the firewalling is takin care of using netfilter, which is a kernel module that decides what
    packets are allowed to come in or go outside. Iptables are just the interface
List existing firewall rules: sudo iptables -L
    
Allow incoming SSH traffic: sudo iptables -A INPUT -p tcp --dport 22 -j ACCEPT
    The incomin SSH trafic refer to an input chains prerrouting
Block all other incoming traffic: sudo iptables -P INPUT DROP
Explore different firewall rules and how to configure them to allow or block specific traffic.
Network Security Concepts:

Learn about common network security threats:
Denial-of-service (DoS) attacks
    Also known as deistributed denial of service is a malicious attempt to disrupt the normal traffil of a targeted server, service or
    network by overwhelming the target or this surrounding infraestructure with a flood of internet traffic.
Port scanning
    A port scan i sa technique hackers use to discver open dorrs or weak points in the network.
    When they send a message to a port, the response they receive determins wheter the port is being used
    A port is a point on a computer where the information exchange between multiple programs and the internet to devices or other computer takes place
    Here are some important ports
        20: (UDP): File transfer protocol used for transferring data
        22(TCP): Secure Shell Protocol used for FTP,port forwarding and secure logins
        23(TCP): The Telnet Protocol used for unencrypted communication
        53 (UDP): The DNS which transaltes internet domain names into machine-readable IP addresses
        80(TCP): The wordldwide Web Hypertex Transfer Protocol (HTTP)
Man-in-the-middle (MitM) attacks
    Is a general term for when a perpetrador positions himself in a conversation between a user and an application, mkin a normal exchange of information.
    The goal of the attack is to steal personal information, such as login credentials, account details, and credit cards numbers, the target of this attacks
    typically are SaaS businesses, e-commerce sites and other where the login is requiered.
Understand basic security measures:
Encryption (e.g., HTTPS, SSH)
    SSH is a cryptographic newtork protocol that provides a secure way to access and manage remote systems.
        The client is the user´s local machine where SSH keys are generated and stored. It´s from this client that users interact
        SSH Key Pair is the core of SSH authentication, this consists of a private and a public key.
        The authentication process consists in this steps
            The user generatess an SSH key pair, on their client machine
            The user associates their public SSH key with the DNs or service he wants to use it.
            The server requests the user´s public key and verifies it agains the stored public key.
            If the keys mathch, the server grants access to the resources.
    HTTPS is a widely used protocol for secure communication over the internet
        The client represents the user´s local machine
        We can use a variety of authentication Methods
            Username and Password: This method is becoming less common due security concerns
            Personal Acces Token (PAT):Is an OTP to acces the resources
            The authentication process is the following
                The user initiates an HTTPS request a service via web browser
                If using a unsername and password, it provides the credentials, if use a PAT, they provide their token
    The key differences between these architectures are the auth method, the security level, the ease of use and acces control.
Virtual Private Networks (VPNs)
    Stands for VIrtual Prvate Network, it runs in the background while you ´re using the internet, keeping you safe and protecting yur privacy.
    This conection encrypts all the data and passes through a safe intermediante stage, known as VPN server.
Hands-on:

Configure a basic firewall on your VM using iptables (or nftables).
Allow only SSH access from your host machine's IP address.
Test the firewall by trying to access different ports on your VM from your host machine.
Proof: Take screenshots of your iptables rules and the results of your tests.
Resources:

iptables documentation (or nftables documentation)
SANS Institute resources on network security